From the previous video, you might have gotten the sense that computing derivatives is really easy
and really straightforward.
Well, that kind of is the case for relatively simple functions like polynomials and sine and cosine.
However, when we start getting to more complicated functions and in particular multiplied functions
or embedded functions, things are not so simple anymore, and computing the derivatives of more complicated
functions becomes more complicated.
And so in this video, I'm going to introduce you to two rules in derivatives calculus called the product
rule and the chain rule.
I'll explain how they work in the slides.
And then we'll switch to code.
And I will show you how to implement those two rules in SymPy.
But I want to actually start with kind of the take home message of this video.
So what should you remember from this video.
The main point is that derivatives of.
I call these interacting functions an apology quotes because that's not a formal mathematical term,
but it's basically multiple functions that are interacting with each other through multiplication or
embedding.
Computing the derivatives is unintuitive.
You spend weeks talking about this kind of stuff in a full calculus course.
The point is that computing the derivatives of simple functions is straightforward.
Once you start getting into more complicated things, the derivatives becomes unintuitive and requires
more practice.
However, in the context of deep learning, libraries like PyTorch and also any other library you use,
of course, in this course we're just focusing on PyTorch.
They have built in routines that can estimate very complicated derivatives with high efficiency and
high accuracy.
So that's really the main point.
I want you to appreciate that computing derivatives can be pretty sophisticated and pretty involved,
and also trust that libraries like PyTorch will do this stuff for you very efficiently, very quickly
and very accurately.
Okay, with that said, let's go back and review the Or.
Let me introduce you to the product rule and the chain rule.
So let's imagine we have two functions f of x and g of x.
For simplicity I am just omitting the x in parentheses here.
Now this is not the product rule because we're not multiplying these two functions.
This is just to show you that if you add two functions together and then take their derivative, that
is equivalent of taking the derivative of each function separately and then adding together the derivatives.
Now this seems pretty straightforward.
So you might expect that when you multiply two functions, the derivative of two multiplied functions
would be the derivative of one times the derivative of the other.
Now you know calculus.
University calculus would be much easier if this were really how things worked.
Unfortunately, it is not that simple.
It's also not super complicated, but it's not this intuitive.
Instead, the product rule, the product rule of derivatives is that the derivative of two multiplied
functions is equal to the derivative of the first times the second, plus the first function times the
derivative of the second.
So this function g.
Here.
This is not the derivative of g.
This is the original function g.
So this is the product rule here we're going to see an example of this in Python in a moment.
First I want to introduce you to the chain rule.
The chain rule concerns when you are embedding one function inside of another function.
So here I have a function g of x and it's embedded inside another function f of x.
And here the rule, the chain rule for computing the derivative of this function f of x.
The derivative of x.
The derivative of f with respect to x is the derivative of f with the g function still inside, multiplied
by the derivative of g outside or independent, you know, separated from f.
Now that's a weird string of characters.
Let me show you an example.
Here we have x squared plus four x cubed.
Now this term here this is our g of x.
And then we have this term here with the parenthesis.
And to the power of five that is our f of x.
So you see we have one function of x that's embedded inside another function.
So now we want to compute the derivative with respect to x.
And following this formula following the chain rule that equals the derivative of f with all the g part
inside.
So the derivative of the outside function is five.
We bring down this exponent here and then subtract one.
So five times all of this inside stuff to the power of four times the derivative of the inside stuff,
which is x or two x plus three times four is 12 times x to the power of three minus one which is squared.
Okay.
So you see that the chain rule gets pretty complicated pretty quickly.
Again this is not just some weird made up rule.
There's a very good reason why it has to be like this.
But that's you know, that's a longer topic for a calculus course.
For now, I want to reiterate these two points here.
The derivatives of interacting functions is unintuitive.
And you don't have to worry about that for deep learning.
Libraries like PyTorch will take care of all the low level stuff for you, and you can focus more on
the more important conceptual aspects of the gradient descent algorithm.
So now we're going to switch to Python and I'm going to show you how to implement these things.
And we'll reiterate these two rules using numpy and SymPy.
Okay.
So we import numpy and scipy.
In this case I'm also importing something called IPython.
This is a library about the the notebook itself dot display.
And this is just going to make these equations look a little bit nicer.
You'll see that in a moment.
Okay.
So like in the previous video I create a symbolic variable x.
And here I'm creating two functions.
So f of x and g of x.
Here I'm computing their individual derivatives.
So this is the derivative of x sorry f separate from g.
And this is the derivative of g separate from x.
And then here you see the product rule.
So the derivative of f times g plus f times the derivative of g.
And this is the wrong way.
This is the this is the way you would think it should work, but it's actually not the right way.
Okay.
And then here I'm using SymPy to compute the derivative of f f times g.
So f of x times g of x.
All right.
And then we print out everything.
So here we see the functions.
This was the function F2X squared.
Here we have the function g.
And yeah let's just go up and show you what this special printing library does.
So basically I just imported this display.
And that alone will make the SymPy printing look a little bit nicer.
So instead of saying or instead of printing out two asterisk, asterisk asterisk two, which is it's
kind of ugly.
We get this really nice looking, you know, LaTeX formatted, nice looking equations, what you would
see in a textbook.
So here are the individual functions here.
Their derivatives, if you like, you can pause the video and take a moment to confirm that this really
is the derivative of this and so on for these two.
Okay.
So here was the product rule that I computed manually.
Here it is via SymPy.
You see these two match.
And this is what I called the wrong way.
This was the derivative of x times the derivative of the derivative of f times the derivative of g.
That's very confusing to, you know, all these just individual letters floating around here.
Anyway, now here we are with the chain rule.
So this is the formula that I showed in the slides.
So we have this function here which we can call g.
And then we have this out here which we can call f.
So in fact maybe I will even rewrite this to make this a little bit clearer.
So I'm going to write g of x equals this stuff.
And then f of x equals g of x to the power of five.
So we have an embedded function.
We need to apply the chain rule and we see its derivative.
Now you can go back to the video and confirm that these are the same.
It looks slightly different initially because in the slides I took the five I left the five as a multiplicative
factor here.
And sympy actually multiplied through by five.
So I had 12 x squared.
And this was two x.
And then sympy just multiplied the five through to give us 60 x squared and ten x.
So in this video I introduce you to two additional rules for computing the derivative.
In fact we are going to use the chain rule for computing or implementing gradient descent in deep learning.
And now that you have an intuitive grasp on the derivative, it's time to move on to the next section
of the course where we really start getting into the math and the mechanisms underlying deep learning.